Pathemata or pathe (Plato, in the Timaeus at least, uses these terms interchangeably) play an important role in the process eventuating in aisthēsis. ``Pathemata'' is perhaps most naturally translated in English as affections. In a not quite archaic usage, affections are conditions or characteristics of a thing brought about by its being affected in some way. But the pathemata that play a role in the causal process eventuating in perception or sensation in Timaeus' account are a specification of the more generic account provided by the natural English translation. It is surprisingly controversial, however, what, exactly, ``pathemata'' means in this context. Thus Taylor (1928, 429-31) understands the pathemata, in this context, as sensible qualities that a thing may have independently of the sensibility of a percipient being affected in any way. They are ``characters of the various bodies themselves'' as opposed to ``the effects produced by the bodies on a percipient''. Cornford (1937, 258-9), by contrast, wants to assimilate Timaeus' account of perception to the account given in the Theaetetus. As a result, he contrasts the pathemata with those ``properties which bodies are supposed to possess in the absence of any sentient being, such as the shapes of the microscopic particles, which are never perceived'' (cornford, 1937, 259); for, according to the Secret Doctrine that Socrates attributes to Protagoras in the Theaetetus 156a-b, a sensible quality and a perceiver's perception of it are ``twin births'' with the consequence that nothing is white without a perception of that whiteness. Since it is controversial how to understand pathemata in this context, it is worth discussing this explicitly before discussing Timaeus' specific examples of pathemata that eventuate in perception or sensation.

Timaeus distinguishes two classes of pathemata. There are:

	1. pathemata that are common to the body as a whole (61d--65b)
	2. pathemata that are peculiar to particular parts of the body (65b--68e)

The body, here, is the human body or, perhaps, the body of a sentient being more generally. This is inconsistent with Taylor's (1928, 431) denial that the pathemata are ``the effects produced by the bodies on a percipient''. In describing the common pathemata, Timaeus' explicit task is to describe the affections of the body as a whole and the names of the agents that produce these affections (65b). Timaeus undertakes a similar task with the peculiar pathemata, that is, he is meant to describe the affections of particular parts of the body and the names of the agents that produce these affections (65b6-c1). Since the agents that produce these affections, whether common or peculiar, are the objects of perception, this is inconsistent with Taylor and Cornford's common insistence that the pathemata are sensible qualities. And this reamins so whether or not sensible qualities are best conceived, in Timaeus' account, as characteristics of bodies had independently of their effects on perceivers or as twinned with the appropriate perception. 

Common pathemata, affections of the body as a whole, are involved in the perception or sensation of:
	1. hot and cold (61d5--62a5)
	2. hard and soft (62b6--c3)
	3. heavy and light (62c3--63e8)
	4. smooth and rough (63e8--64a1)
	5. pleasure and pain (64a2--65b3)

Peculiar pathemata are not affection of the body as a whole, but are rather affections of particular parts of the body that are liable to give rise to perception or sensation. Timaeus describes four such parts:

	1. the tongue (65b--66c)
	2. the nose (66c--67a)
	3. the ears (or perhaps the brain and the blood) (46c--47e, 67a--c, 80a)
	4. the eyes (45b--46c, 67c--68d)

Pathemata peculiar to the tongue are involved in the perception or sensation of:

	1. astringent and harsh (65c6--d4)
	2. acrid and agreeable (65d4--65e4)
	3. pungent (65e4--66a2)
	4. acid (66a2--b7)
	5. sweet (66b7--c7)

Pathemata peculiar to the nose are involved in the perception or sensation of:

	1. odours of water transforming into air or air into water (66c-67a)
	2. pleasant and unpleasant odours (66d1--67a6)

Pathemata peculiar to the ears (or perhaps the brain and the blood) are involved in the perception of:

	1. high and low (67b6)
	2. smooth and harsh (67b6-7)
	3. loud and soft (67c1)

Finally, pathemata peculiar to the eyes are involved in the perception of:

	1. colors (Timaeus 45b--46c, 67c--68d)

If common pathemata are the pathemata involved in tactile perception and sensation, then the peculiar pathemata are the pathemata involved in the remaining four special senses: taste, smell, hearing, and vision. Here I am helping myself, in full knowledge of its anachronism, to the vocabulary of Aristotle in De Anima and De Sensu. Undoubtedly the Timaeus account of perception was an influence on Aristotle's own account in these works. However, for now at least, I want to bracket any suggestion that talk of the special senses may carry that the particular parts of the body affected are sense organs. Whether or not the particular parts of the body affected, as Timaeus conceives of them, are properly deemed sense organs shall be assessed as we proceed.

Pathemata are not the objects of perception as Taylor and Cornford maintain but, rather, they are a causal intermediary between the objects of perception and the perceptions or sensations that they are liable to give rise to (O'Brien 1984, 138; Brisson 1997). The named agents of these affections, explicitly contrasted with the pathemata themselves, are the objects of perception. Moreover, perceptions are themselves explicitly contrasted with the pathemata. Pathemata, understood as affections of a sentient body, while necessary for the production of perception or sensation, are not sufficient. And if pathemata may obtain without perception, then perceptions are distinct from pathemata. Let's consider these claims in turn.

First, Timaeus contrasts the agents that cause the pathemata with the pathemata themselves. Moreover, these agents are the objects of perception or sensation (with the possible exception of pleasure and pain). Touch, for example, affords us with thermal perception. We can feel that a body is hot or cold by touching it. When our flesh is in contact with a hot or cold body it is affected in a certain way, and this affection is liable to give rise to thermal perception. When we touch something hot, for example, we don't merely feel the consequent warmth of our flesh, we feel the warmth of the body that we are in contact with. And both the affection, the pathema, and the agent that causes it are both called by the same name, ``hot'' or ``cold'' as the case may be (61e--62b6). This is true not only for the common pathemata (with the possible exception of pleasure and pain), but it is true, as well, of the peculiar pathemata. Timaeus makes this general claim explicit. Aisthēsis occurs when the power of the agent that caused the pathos is reported to the phronimon, the seat of intelligence or consciousness (65b4). Note well, what is reported is not the affection of the body but the power of the agent that caused that affection. And if that report determines the content of the perception then what is perceived is not the pathos, but its external cause. But if the pathemata are contrasted with the agents that cause them and these latter are, on the whole at least, the objects of perception and sensation, then the pathemata are not sensible qualities as Taylor and Cornford maintain.

Second, pathemata while necessary for the production of aisthēsis are not sufficient. Pathemata may obtain without eliciting perception or sensation. When an affection is violent, intense, and contrary to the natural state of the body, it is painful. However, when an affection is mild and gradual, it is insensible (64d4). And earlier (64a--d) Timaeus tells us that when the pathos falls upon the body, whether or not it produces aisthēsis depends upon the nature of the body receiving that pathos. Parts of the body may be more or less mobile, depending upon the character of the particles that compose it. If the affected part of the body is mobile it passes the affection around to other mobile parts until it reaches the phronimon, the seat of intelligence or consciousness, where it reports the power of agent that caused the affection. Whereas if the part of the body upon which the pathos falls is immobile, as in the case of hair and nails, though it is affected, it does not pass this affection around with the consequence that the power of the agent that caused the affection is not reported to the phronimon. So pathemata may obtain without eventuating in aisthēsis. Thus, pathemata while necessary for the production of aisthēsis are not sufficient. If that is right, then the pathemata are not twinned with a perception in the way that Cornford maintains.

Timaeus inaugurates the discussion of the pathemata with a methodological dilemma (61c4--d5). Timaeus distinguishes between the pathemata, on the one hand, and the origin of the flesh and things pertaining to it and the mortal parts of the soul, on the other. The problem is twofold. First, one cannot adequately account for the pathemata without accounting for the origin of the flesh and things pertaining to it and the mortal part of the soul. But second, one cannot account for the origin of the flesh and things pertaining to it and the mortal parts of the soul without accounting for the pathemata. The problem is not one of mutual entailment or that these subject matters somehow presuppose one another directly. The problem is rather that an account of either subject matter each presupposes aisthēsis with the consequence that an account of each must make reference to the other. Hence the methodological dilemma: Timaeus cannot account for either without reference to the other, but it is impossible to give an account of both subjects at once. Timaeus solution is to first account for the pathemata (61d--68d) and then subsequently account for the origin of the flesh and things pertaining to it (73b1ff) and the mortal parts of the soul (69c5ff). 

Two questions arise, only the first of which we are in position to answer. First how exactly and in what sense does an account of the pathemata presuppose aisthēsis? Second how exactly and in what sense does an account of the flesh and the mortal soul presuppose aisthēsis? Consider, then, the first question. Pathemata are affections to be sure. And some at least of the common pathemata may obtain not only in animate bodies capable of sentience but inanimate bodies as well. Thus in Timaeus' discussion of hard and soft (62b6--c3) we are told that we call ``hard'' that which the flesh yields to and ``soft'' what yields to the flesh and then immediately claims that these terms also apply more generally to bodies in relation to one another. Thus, for example, earth is harder than water since water yields to earth. So yielding is the pathema and not only does the flesh yield to a stone, say, but do does water. Still, the pathemata, whether common or peculiar, that Timaeus discusses are pathemata of sentient animate bodies. The relevant pathemata are pathemata that when they fall upon a sentient body are liable to produce aisthēsis (should they be intense enough and fall upon a part of the body composed of sufficiently mobile particles). 

